Building the remote dbt MCP server blog post (#7808)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/blog/2025-08-26-building-the-remote-dbt-mcp-server.md

This is why we are excited to announce a new way to integrate with dbt MCP: **the remote dbt MCP server**. The remote dbt MCP server doesn’t require installing dependencies or running the dbt MCP server in your infrastructure, making it easier than ever to build and run agents. It is **available today in public beta** for users with dbt Starter, Enterprise, or Enterprise+ plans, ready for you to start building AI-powered applications.

<!--truncate-->

## What is the Remote dbt MCP Server? <Lifecycle status="self_service,managed,managed_plus,beta" />

Commonly, agents and MCP servers run locally on your computer, but local-first agents are limited in the type of applications that can be built. With remote MCP, new experiences are possible. For instance, remote MCP enables server-side agents to perform long-running tasks, be shared across an organization, and be accessed through web applications -- all experiences that are far more difficult (or impossible) in a local agent architecture.

> The remote dbt MCP server brings **structured, governed context** to these experiences and opens the door for innovative data applications to be built on top. The remote dbt MCP server makes it possible for your agent to answer business questions with the [dbt Semantic Layer](/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/dbt-sl), discover data assets with the [dbt Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api), and run natural-language queries with SQL tools. Check out our docs [here](/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp) to learn about the full list of supported tools. These capabilities are easy to integrate in various platforms with the standardized MCP specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remote dbt MCP server brings **structured, governed context** to these experiences and enables you to build innovative data applications on top of them. The remote dbt MCP server makes it possible for your agent to answer business questions with the [dbt Semantic Layer](/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/dbt-sl), discover data assets with the [dbt Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api), and run natural-language queries with SQL tools. Check out our docs [here](/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp) to learn about the full list of supported tools. These capabilities are easy to integrate in various platforms with the standardized MCP specification.
```

The remote dbt MCP server is great for application builders, but there are still times when you would want to run the dbt MCP server locally. Specifically, **if you are using a local coding agent like Cursor or Claude Code, we recommend the local dbt MCP server.** This ensures that the code you are writing locally matches what the agent has access to.

## The Remote dbt MCP Server Architecture

> Hosting a remote MCP server is non-trivial. While a local MCP server only has to consider a single tenant experience, remote servers need to manage concurrent connections from multiple different users as well as the deployment and maintenance of the server and infrastructure. Additionally, connections need to be securely authenticated and isolated from each other. The latest updates to the MCP spec provides a new way to communicate with MCP servers, [Streamable HTTP](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/transports), allowing for stateless remote connections with agents. Streamable HTTP makes things easier but there is still a high lift for most data teams to deploy an MCP server. With the remote dbt MCP server, we handle all of this complexity so, if you are building an agentic application, all you need to worry about is making an HTTP connection to our API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hosting your own remote MCP server is non-trivial. While a local MCP server only has to consider a single tenant experience, remote servers need to manage concurrent connections from multiple different users as well as the deployment and maintenance of the server and infrastructure. Additionally, connections need to be securely authenticated and isolated from each other. The latest updates to the MCP spec provides a new way to communicate with MCP servers, [Streamable HTTP](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/transports), allowing for stateless remote connections with agents. Streamable HTTP makes things easier but there is still a high lift for most data teams to deploy an MCP server. With the remote dbt MCP server, we handle all of this complexity so, if you are building an agentic application, all you need to worry about is making an HTTP connection to our API.
```

The agent we implement here will be able to conduct conversational analytics grounded in **structured, governed context** from your dbt project. This means it can receive a user's question, search for relevant metadata with the dbt Discovery API, find important metrics with dbt Semantic Layer API, explore the data, and return an accurate, trustworthy answer. This shows how the remote dbt MCP server can power AI applications that combine the flexibility of LLMs with the trust and consistency of your dbt assets.

For this example to work, you will need to install LangGraph dependencies and set an environment variable for the Anthropic API key:

```shell
pip install langgraph "langchain[anthropic]" langchain-mcp-adapters
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=<your-api-key>
```

> First, we need to define the URL & headers that the MCP client will use. These values will depend on your specific dbt Cloud deployment. In this example, we are setting the configuration from environment variables. For more information on this configuration, check out our docs [here](/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we need to define the URL & headers that the MCP client will use. These values will depend on your specific dbt Cloud deployment. In this example, we are setting the configuration from environment variables. For more information on this configuration, refer to [About dbt Model Context Protocol ](/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp).
```

---
title: "Building the Remote dbt MCP Server"
description: "Learn about the new remote dbt MCP server, how it was built, and how to use it to build agents."
slug: building-the-remote-dbt-mcp-server
authors: [devon_fulcher]

tags: [ai, data ecosystem, mcp]
hide_table_of_contents: false

date: 2025-07-11
is_featured: true
---

In April, we released the local [dbt MCP (Model Context Protocol) server](https://docs.getdbt.com/blog/introducing-dbt-mcp-server) as an open source project to connect AI agents and LLMs with direct, governed access to trusted dbt assets. The dbt MCP server provides a [universal, open standard](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/mcp) for bridging AI systems with your structured context that keeps your agents accurate, governed, and trustworthy. To learn more about the dbt MCP server, read our docs [here](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion 

<!--truncate-->

```

---
title: "Building the Remote dbt MCP Server"
description: "Learn about the new remote dbt MCP server, how it was built, and how to use it to build agents."
slug: building-the-remote-dbt-mcp-server
authors: [devon_fulcher]

tags: [ai, data ecosystem, mcp]
hide_table_of_contents: false

date: 2025-07-11
is_featured: true
---

> In April, we released the local [dbt MCP (Model Context Protocol) server](https://docs.getdbt.com/blog/introducing-dbt-mcp-server) as an open source project to connect AI agents and LLMs with direct, governed access to trusted dbt assets. The dbt MCP server provides a [universal, open standard](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/mcp) for bridging AI systems with your structured context that keeps your agents accurate, governed, and trustworthy. To learn more about the dbt MCP server, read our docs [here](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In April, we released the local [dbt MCP (Model Context Protocol) server](/blog/introducing-dbt-mcp-server) as an open source project to connect AI agents and LLMs with direct, governed access to trusted dbt assets. The dbt MCP server provides a [universal, open standard](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/mcp) for bridging AI systems with your structured context that keeps your agents accurate, governed, and trustworthy. To learn more about the dbt MCP server, read our docs [here](/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp).
```

This is why we are excited to announce a new way to integrate with dbt MCP: **the remote dbt MCP server**. The remote dbt MCP server doesn’t require installing dependencies or running the dbt MCP server in your infrastructure, making it easier than ever to build and run agents. It is **available today in public beta** for users with dbt Starter, Enterprise, or Enterprise+ plans, ready for you to start building AI-powered applications.

## What is the Remote dbt MCP Server?

Commonly, agents and MCP servers run locally on your computer, but local-first agents are limited in the type of applications that can be built. With remote MCP, new experiences are possible. For instance, remote MCP enables server-side agents to perform long-running tasks, be shared across an organization, and accessed through web applications - all experiences which are far more difficult or impossible in a local agent architecture.

> The remote dbt MCP server brings **structured, governed context** to these experiences and opens the door for innovative data applications to be built on top. The remote dbt MCP server makes it possible for your agent to answer business questions with the [dbt Semantic Layer](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/dbt-sl), discover data assets with the [dbt Discovery API](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api), and run natural-language queries with SQL tools. Check out our docs [here](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp) to learn about the full list of supported tools. These capabilities are easy to integrate in various platforms with the standardized MCP specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remote dbt MCP server brings **structured, governed context** to these experiences and opens the door for innovative data applications to be built on top. The remote dbt MCP server makes it possible for your agent to answer business questions with the [dbt Semantic Layer](/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/dbt-sl), discover data assets with the [dbt Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api), and run natural-language queries with SQL tools. Check out our docs [here](/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp) to learn about the full list of supported tools. These capabilities are easy to integrate in various platforms with the standardized MCP specification.
```

The agent we implement here will be able to conduct conversational analytics grounded in **structured, governed context** from your dbt project. This means it can receive a user's question, search for relevant metadata with the dbt Discovery API, find important metrics with dbt Semantic Layer API, explore the data, and return an accurate, trustworthy answer. This shows how the remote dbt MCP server can power AI applications that combine the flexibility of LLMs with the trust and consistency of your dbt assets.

For this example to work, you will need to install LangGraph dependencies and set an environment variable for the Anthropic API key:

```shell
pip install langgraph "langchain[anthropic]" langchain-mcp-adapters
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=<your-api-key>
```

> First, we need to define the URL & headers that the MCP client will use. These values will depend on your specific dbt Cloud deployment. In this example, we are setting the configuration from environment variables. For more information on this configuration, check out our docs [here](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we need to define the URL & headers that the MCP client will use. These values will depend on your specific dbt Cloud deployment. In this example, we are setting the configuration from environment variables. For more information on this configuration, check out our docs [here](/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp).
```
